---

layout: assignments
title: "Assignment #1"
due-date: Sept 14
live: true
category: assignment

---

## Assignment #1
For this assignment you will be writing 3 programs which should be saved independently as their own ".py" file. The filename you should use for each program is outlined in the sections below. When you're finished you should submit your programs to the Assignment #1 category on Brightspace.

For each program, remember to comment your source code as if you were describing your code to someone who may be viewing it for the first time. Also include your name, the date, your class section and the name of your program at the top of your file.

You may work by yourself or with a partner. Remember, collaborating just entails discussing approaches to the problems; **you should not be writing actual code together**. If you choose to work with someone else please be sure to give them credit in your source code and on Brightspace when you submit your work.  Each member of a team must submit their own unique copy of the assignment to get credit for the assignment.

Make sure that IDLE is set up to use a fixed-width font (Courier is the font that I use in class) and that your font size is set to 14pt. On a Mac you can click on IDLE->Preferences to adjust your font size; On a PC you can click on Options->Configure IDLE


<div class="section-break"><br></div>


### Problem #1: Algorithmic Thinking (2 points)

Describe an algorithm to find the largest number in a list of random numbers. Your steps should be written one by one, in plain English, as if you were instructing a friend. Be as specific as possible. _**You DO NOT need to write any actual code**._

- You can assume your friend knows how to compare two numbers to each other and determine which one is larger. (i.e. 10 is larger than 2).
- You can also assume your friend is able to store values in their memory (similar to a variable in Python).

Write each step as a code comment in a Python file and save it as LastNameFirstName_assign1_problem1.py (for example, "ZhaoEmily_assign1_problem1.py")

_---_

Below is an example of what your instructions should look like. This specific algorithm was written to help a friend to determine if a number is even or odd: 
```
# Divide your number by 2.
# If dividing by 2 leaves no remainder, then your number is even.
# If dividing by 2 results in a remainder of 1, then your number is odd.
```

========================================================================

*0 points – Steps are not clear; instructions were not followed*  
*1 point – Parts of the algorithm might work, but there could still be more clarity*  
*2 points – Algorithm is specific, clear, and would successfully lead to the largest number being found in the list*

<div class="section-break"><br><br></div>

### Problem #2: Game Logic (3 points)
Pretend you're a game master walking two friends through a game of Tic Tac Toe, step by step. How does the game start? What happens each round? The game should stop when someone wins. Write all the steps out in plain English. Once all the steps are determined, convert each step to a `string` and print them out using the `print()` function.

*If* you were to go about coding the game, what are some variables that you think you would need to define? There will probably be many, but think of five, declare them validly, and explain in comments what they would do. For example, `gridSize = 9` would be a good example. 

Declare your variables at the top. Print out each step using the `print()` function. Save your file as LastNameFirstName_assign1_problem2.py (for example, "ZhaoEmily_assign1_problem2.py")

_---_

Below is an example of what your instructions should look like. This specific algorithm was written to help two friends play a game of Rock, Paper, Scissors: 
```
# some possible variables:
player1_choice = "rock" 	# stores player 1s choice as a string
player2_choice = "scissors"	# stores player 2s choice as a string

print('Players have the option to choose between "rock," "paper," and "scissors".')
print('On the count of three, both players say one of the options aloud.')
print('Rock beats scissors, scissors beats paper, paper beats rock.')
print('If both choices are the same, it's a tie.')
print('One. Two. Three. Shoot!')
print('Player 1 chose rock. Player 2 chose scissors. Player 1 wins.')

```

========================================================================

*[0-2 points] – Clarity of instruction*  
*[0-1 points] – Appropriateness of variables and their explanations*  

<div class="section-break"><br><br></div>

### Problem #3: Math Expressions [Part A + B] (5 points total)

*Note: This program will require the use of the `format()` function, which is introduced in [Module 2](https://cs.nyu.edu/elearning/CSCI_UA_0002/module02.php#format).*

You have recently been hired by a local bakery to design a program that simplifies the conversion of recipe measurements. To help you get started, the bakery has provided you with a list of common conversions:

1 ml = 0.202884 tsp   
1 tbsp = 3 tsp  
1 cup = 16 tbsp  
1 pint = 2 cups  
1 quart = 2 pints  
1 gallon = 4 quarts  
1 floz = 29.5735 ml  

Using the formulas above, write a program that takes an initial user input in milliliters, and creates a table of all the conversions. Here's a sample run, using **250 milliliters** as an initial input: 

```
Enter an amount (in ML) to convert: 250.0
------------------------------------------------
          mL to US Fluid Volume Units                  
------------------------------------------------
ml:                     250.0
tsp:                    50.721000000000004
tbsp:                   16.907
cup(s):                 1.0566875
pint(s):                0.52834375
quart(s):               0.264171875
gallon(s):              0.06604296875
fl oz:                  8.453514125822105
```

While your output should match as closely as possible in terms of spacing, you do not worry about decimal point precision for this program (no numeric formatting required).


### But! Before you write any code...

In computer science, **pseudocode** is a plain language description of the steps in an algorithm. You can think of it as writing---first in your native language---an outline or initial draft of an essay that you will eventually have to translate to French, or Python in our case.

**Part A (2 points)**  
Using code comments, write out your plan (aka the pseudocode), IN ENGLISH, for how you will approach creating this table. I'll get you started:

```
# First, I will determine the width of the entire table
# Then, I will figure out a way to center the title of the table by...
# ...
# For the two column layout, I will...
# ...
```

**Part B (3 points)**  
 Now you can code the program, following your plan above.
 
 Try your best to programatically figure out the spaces; I don't want to see strings defined like this:
 ```
 ml = "ml:            "
 ```
This is known as **\"hard-coding.\"** When programming, it's best to imagine that the content might change. If I suddenly wanted to increase or decrease the width of the table, I would have to go through each hardcoded variable, and manually add or subtract spaces---that sounds like a lot of work! Let's try to find a way to avoid that.
 

 This program should be named as follows: LastNameFirstName_assign1_problem3.py (for example, “ZhaoEmily_assign1_problem3.py”) Please include both parts A and B in the same file.

 ========================================================================

 *[0-2 points] Clarity of pseudocode in Part A; pseudocode is written in code comments*  
 *[0-1 points] Translation of pseudocode into actual code – I can clearly see how your logic became code*  
 *[0-2 points] Overall execution of program:*  
 *—utilizes input, print, and format functions correctly*  
 *—did not hardcode any variables*  
 *—output matches sample*  
